Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to carry on with this little series
on a bunch of related topics last time we talked
about relativistic velocity addition in Stein's
special theory of relativity and the connection
with projective 1 dimensional geometry today
we're going to talk about a new kind of circle
we're gonna identify which we could call a core
circle and in our next video we'll talk a little
bit about Paul Miller's protractor and then tie
these various things together alright so circles
is something that we have talked about earlier in
this series I hope you remember some of those
videos in particular we defined a circle to be
a symbol something like this which is specified
by a point a B and a number K and to this symbol
we can associate this equation X minus a squared
plus y minus B squared equals K which we recognize
as a circle with center a B and quadrants K not
radius but quadrants okay there are three really
important circles and we've talked about two of
them we've talked about the unit circle which
has equation x squared plus y squared equals
1 plays a very important prominent role in all
this geometry centered at the origin quadrants
equal to 1 at some point I've also mentioned this
imaginary unit circle with equation x squared
plus y squared equals minus 1 and you probably
were wondering why I call that the second most
important circle we are still in the process of
finding that out that will be revealed a little
bit later but today I want to talk about a third
kind of really fundamental important circle which
I'm going to give this named core circle so the
core circle is the circle with Center 1/2 0
and quadrants one quarter and it's equation
is x squared plus y squared equals x so a lot
like the unit circle but there's an X on the
right hand side instead of a 1 so I'm going to
be looking at this circle today and it turns out
that it's it's very interesting for us and we
get to see certain things more clearly when we
look at this Cora circle rather than the unit
circle all right so these various things have
extensions and generalizations in other metrical
geometries in particular if we're working in the
relativistic read setting we can also inquire
about analogues of these things and we'll see
that they play a role too so let's begin by
reviewing some essential facts about our unit
circle the circle with equation X square plus y
squared equals 1 and then we'll look to sort of
modifying some of these facts for this core
circle all right so here's our unit circle
in the XY plane diameter going from minus 1 to 1
one of the very fundamental things about it which
I emphasize many times in my channel ok a very
fundamental fact that all undergraduates should
well know is a rational parameterization of this
thing and that can be thought of is arising from
choosing a point on the y-axis with coordinate
T joining the point minus 1 here on the x-axis
to that point T and seeing where that line meets
the circle in the other point we call that Y of T
then a little calculation shows that's 1 minus
T squared over 1 plus T squared and 2t over 1
plus T squared so I hope you've all memorized
this formula by now a few videos ago we look to
generalizing this a little bit because this is
a little bit imperfect in that this particular
point here but it's a sort of a singular role with
respect to this parameterization it corresponds
to T equals infinity which is maybe a little bit
nebulous so the way to overcome that difficulty
is to move to a slightly more general projective
parameterization which brings out the importance
of the projective line again now what we're
going to do is we're going to parameterize
the same circle by a projective one point u2t and
here's the formula u squared minus T squared over
u squared plus T squared 2 u T over u squared
plus T squared when u equals 1 then we recover
the earlier rational parameterization now this
can also be described in terms of complex numbers
conveniently it can be thought of if you think
of a complex number as a pair like this as the
complex number u plus I T divided by u minus I T
the complex conjugate and another way of writing
that is to think about it as being the complex
number u plus I T squared divided by the quadrants
of that complex number which is just the sum of
the squares of the the real and the imaginary
parts in other words u squared plus T squared
ok and with regard to this rational parameter
ization let's just make a few other observations
that if we look at the line through the origin
which is parallel to this line here that we
use to construct our point e then this line
here passes through this point one t v--'s just
shifted over by one in the X direction so it's
slope is T and it turns out then that another way
of thinking about this point is as the reflection
of the point 1 in this line here ok so now the
connection with projective quadrants or a spread
this line and this line are too projective one
points we just think about our one-dimensional
projective situation then line to the
origin exactly what we're talking about
and the relationship between these two lines is
determined by a projective quadrants now in this
case the projective quadrants between this line
and this line is T squared over 1 plus T squared
remember this is the line 1 to 0 if you use
the standard formula 1 times 0 minus 1 times
T all squared over 1 squared plus T squared
times 1 squared plus 0 squared then you'll
get T squared over 1 plus T squared so that's
what we usually call a projective quadrants
but in this two-dimensional setting when we're
talking about planar geometry I'd like to use
the word spread instead of projective quadrants
projective quadrants is something that's really
sitting in the projective world while spread is
a purely F find quantity although they happen
to agree here they're exactly the same so we can
define the spread between these two lines as being
the projective quadrants in the usual fashion so
this quantity T squared over 1 plus T squared we
recognize this is the quadrants of this opposite
side in this little right triangle divided by
the hypotenuse squadron's so it's really like a
square of a sine of an angle if you believe in
angles and if you believe in things called sines
so this connects with trigonometric stuff quite
naturally but the point is that this quantity
is purely algebraic and requires no infinite
processes all right so please check this formula
and you can check that this projective quadrants
and this projective quadrants are in fact the
same it's actually true that this is what the
bisector between these two things here which
reinforces a familiar fact that in classical
geometry is referred to as saying that the angle
subtended by a chord at the center is twice the
angle subtended at a point on the circumference
so in terms of angles this would be twice the
angle of this we're gonna see very clearly that we
don't want to think in terms of angles it's much
preferable to think in terms of spreads everything
becomes much clearer and ultimately more logical
and tight all right so this is a quick review of
hopefully things that you've become very familiar
with with regard to the unit circle now we want
to change gears a little bit and look at this
core circle from roughly the same kind of point
of view all right so the core circle is defined by
having this equation it has center the point 1/2
0 and quadrants 1/2 squared or 1/4 if we expand
this thing out we're gonna get x squared minus X
plus 1/4 plus y squared equals 1/4 and then the 1
quarters will cancel if we bring the minus X to
the other side we'll just have x squared plus y
squared equals x so that's the same equation the
center of this circle is the point 1/2 0 there
is a circle right there it passes through the
point 0 0 it also passes through the point 1 0
because 1 squared plus 0 squared equals 1 the
quadrants of this thing is 1/4 the right hand
side there the radius would be 1/2 but we prefer
to think in terms of the quadrant so that's 1/2
squared or 1/4 this thing has a diameter which
is the interval from 0 to 1 has the property that
it's symmetric about the x-axis because if you
replace Y with minus y then you still get another
point on the circle so there's a diameter rate
along there and this is it from the unit circle
which is this one here which has diameter from
minus one to one we'll see later in this course
that in many ways the interval zero one is more
important and fundamental than minus one one so
this is going to be a theme which will gradually
become more and more important as we go on we're
going to see that yes the interval minus 1 1 is
a very important interval in mathematics but for
many purposes the interval 0 1 is actually more
basic and more fundamental I just want to plant
that idea in your mind so let it resonate there
for a few months or perhaps years and eventually
you'll come to appreciate this so the 3 number
is 0 1 and minus 1 are the three most important
numbers in mathematics right for sure they are the
three most important and if you had to say which
of these three are the most important you'd have
to say that 0 & 1 are more important than minus
1 just the way things are automatically so these
two numbers are a little bit more important than
minus 1 that's doesn't prove anything but it's
suggestive that perhaps this interval 0 1 actually
really is more important in the interval minus
1 to 1 which would be then followed by the idea
that ok maybe this circle which is built on the
interval 0 1 deserves at least as much attention
as our much more familiar unit circle that we're
always drawing one of the things I'd like to
promote in this series is a kind of a flexibility
the idea that we don't have to be wedded to one
particular point of view the way you're prepared
to change our orientation and look at things from
a different point of view adopt new possibilities
and venture forth towards new horizons this is a
small such step to regard this interval 0 1
as really a lovely interval we'll see later
on that that has a lot of repercussions a lot of
repercussions to that little observation so there
is our new core circle with equation x squared
plus y squared equals x sitting inside the unit
circle and now we want to study that core circle
a little bit more carefully so one very noticeable
advantage to this core circle is that it has
a more direct relation to the projective line
p1 that we've been talking a lot about because if
we visualize our projective line as lines through
the origin here then the origin happens to be a
point on the circle rather than the center of the
circle that makes a big difference in terms of the
way the projective line of these one-dimensional
subspaces of our affine plane interact with the
circle so we can see that by asking the following
question where does this particular line the line
u2t here's a point u comma T in the affine plane
and here is a line through that point and the
origin this is the line that we would usually call
the projective one point u 2 T it's determined
by the proportion between these two numbers so
let's call it a and the question is where does
this line meet our core circle see this line as
a line in the two-dimensional space can be viewed
as multiples of this point we're probably better
yet this vector or there's the equation of the
line if we wanted to write it as a equation x
and y so how are we going to find this point
here well we're just going to take the point
lambda u T and plug it into the equation of the
circle and solve for lambda so if we put lambda
u in for X and lambda T in for we get lambda u
squared plus lambda T squared equals lambda you
bring everything to one side and factor out the
common lambda we get remaining lambda u squared
plus lambda T squared minus u equals 0 so if
a product two things equals zero then either
a lambda equals zero in which case we're just
talking about the origin 0 0 which we know is
in fact yes a solution to the meet of the line and
a circle or more interestingly this term being 0
means that we can solve for lambda in terms of U
and T we get lambda equals u over u squared plus
T squared in other words the x coordinate of the
point we're starting with divided by the quadrants
of this point at least from the origin and so
if we look at lambda times this point multiply
the coordinates U and T by this lambda then we get
what we might call C u 2 T which is u squared over
u square plus T squared + u T over u square
plus T squared so this is a parameterization
of the circle it's a parameterization which is a
projective parameterization very much in keeping
your in the same direction as our projective
parameterization e of the unit circle you can
see it's a little bit simpler than that other
one it's quite similar there's a u squared plus
T squared in the denominator as there was in
the other example but for the unit circle we
had au squared minus T squared we had a 2-u T
so this is a marginally a little bit simpler but
geometrically it's simpler because we haven't
had to move from the line we've taken the line
and we've just scaled found a convenient point on
that line to identify with the point on the circle
that's not what we did with the unit circle story
we had to square that complex number which took us
off the line that we were interested in and then
scale that thing down now there's an interesting
alternative proach to get at this parameterization
of our core circle which is to look at our unit
circle and take the parameterization that we
have of that and just dilate the circle by a
factor of 1/2 and then translate it over again by
1/2 that's how geometrically we can go from the
unit circle we dilate by 1/2 then we get a circle
here which has quadrants 1/4 of radius 1/2 which
is the same as our core circle it's just that it's
centered now at 0-0 instead of at 1/2 0 so if we
then subsequently move it over by 1/2 then we're
just at the core circle okay so we could take the
point that we know eu2 T which is U squared minus
T squared over u squared plus T squared 2 u T over
u square plus T squared and see what happens to
that point if we dilate by a factor of 1/2 and
add 1/2 so if we dilate by 1/2 the first thing
that happens is that we have to divide here by 2
and this 2 factor here disappears and then next
we want to move over by 1/2 in the x-direction
which just means adding 1/2 in the x-direction so
what do we get when we do that well this is just
the same as that here when we put everything over
a common denominator there's a 2 u squared plus T
squared if we multiply top and bottom here by u
squared plus T squared then the u squared minus
T squared plus the u squared plus T squared will
give us 2 u squared the two will then cancel with
the 2 that's on the bottom and we'll just get u
squared over u squared plus T so so we're gonna
get exactly the same story that we got in the
previous slide what we call see you to tea so
this is sort of interesting that our same mine
you to tea which generates the parameterization
for our unit circle by essentially multiplying
this complex number by itself and then dividing
by its quadrants that really is effectively the
same as normalizing just dividing this thing by
that lambda factor to get on our core circle all
right so here I've just sort of summarized that
projective parametrization of our core circle
there's our formula for it which is actually
multiple of U and T that point there so now I
want to go back to an interesting theorem that
we established for the unit circle with the idea
of getting the corresponding theorem for the core
circle this is the unit circle quadrants theorem
and it was derived in math foundations 1:29 you
might want to have a review of that it told us
that if we have two points B 1 and E 2 on the
unit circle whose projective parameters were u 1 2
T 1 and u 2 2 T 2 then the quadrants between those
two points and we're talking about capital Q that
means to find quadrants change in x squared plus
change in y squared that kind of affine quadrants
that was equal to this following expression
involving the four numbers u 1 T 1 u 2 T 2 4 u 1
T 2 minus u 2 T 1 squared over u 1 squared plus
T 1 squared u 2 square plus T 2 squared now
at the time I remarked that this was quite an
important expression and now you've had a lot more
familiarity with projective quadrants so you don't
need any more convincing you know that yes this
is a very important quantity this is basically
the replacement for an angle once you start doing
planar geometry or even one dimensional geometry
correctly however there is a factor for here that
factor for did not figure in the projective story
all right so now let's look at the corresponding
fact for the core circle the core circle quadrants
theorem it is that if we have two points C 1
and C 2 on the core circle in other words their
parameterised by C of U 1 to T 1 and C u 2 2 T
2 then the ordinary Euclidean quadrants between
those two points on the core circle is given by
exactly the same expression but without the 4 and
now we can say well that is exactly the projective
quadrants between these corresponding projective 1
points between the one point u 1 T 1 and the 1
point u 2 2 T 2 we get an exact correspondence
between the Euclidean quadrants between two a fine
points and the projective quadrants between two
projective 1 points this really is demonstrating
that yes there is a lovely connection between
the projective line and this core circle this
will be a major tool for us all right so let me
demonstrate this monthly fact in an explicit
example and as usual I'm prepared to give
you explicit examples for which we can actually
demonstrate the truth of our theorems by making
explicit calculations which we can actually finish
we don't have two points well if we kept on doing
it we would we would get this no we're actually
gonna make the calculations and we're going to see
that the left hand side actually equals the right
hand side without any three dots yeah there's a
three dot less theory here I'm interested in
three dauntless mathematics all right we're
two three projective one points very familiar ones
at one point one to two which we'll call a one the
one point three to one which we'll call a two
and the one point minus one to one which we'll
call a three corresponding to each of those are
the corresponding points on our core circle a1
a2 a3 how do we get a 1 we get a 1 by taking the
point 1 2 and multiplying both coordinates by the
number lambda which is the x-coordinate divided
by the quadrants quadrants being 1 squared plus 2
squared or 5 so we're gonna multiply both entries
by one-fifth to give us 1/5 2/5 that's that point
there the point a 2 is obtained by taking 3 2 1
and dividing both entries by the product of the
X which is 3 divided by the quadrants which is 9
plus 1 or 10 so we multiply both by 3/10 to give
us 9/10 and 3/10 that's that point there and the
point a 3 obtained by taking -1 1 and multiplying
both entries by minus 1 over 2 2 because it's
one squared plus 1 squared to give us 1/2 minus
1/2 and that's the point a 3 down there now the
projective quadrants is formed by these 3 lines
something that we've had a look at we've computed
before that the quadrants between 1 2 three one
is a half now the quadrants between -1 1 & 1/2
is 9/10 and the quadrants between minus 1 1 & 3
2 1 is 4/5 and we could denote these quadrants as
here on our diagram by little lines it's the same
notation that we use when we're talking about
spreads so we don't get confused with angles
because we're not talking about angles here you
don't want to talk about angles we want to talk
about the spreads or the projective quadrant says
these other really algebraic essential aspects of
things so there's a spread or projective quadrants
of a half there 4/5 there nine-tenths there now
what did we just assert in that last theorem
we asserted that these projective quantities
correspond to the affine quadrants is between
these corresponding three points if we calculate
the affine quadrants capital Q between a 1 and
a 2 so difference in x coordinates squared plus
difference in y-coordinates square there they are
there so 9/10 minus 1/5 all squared plus 3 tenths
minus 2/5 all squared so that's a 7/10 squares
forty nine hundredths and that's one-tenth squared
its one hundredth for a total of 50 hundredths or
one half it's similar to the quadrants between a
2 and a 3 you can check that sum of squares is 4/5
and the quadrants between a 1 and a 3 that sum of
squares is 9/10 so absolutely direct connection
between the geometry of our one dimensional
projective setting and this affine geometry in
the plane where we're looking at points on our
core circle the quadrants between these two points
is exactly the same as the spread between those
two lines that half and that half are the same the
quadrants here is exactly the same as that spread
there or projective quadrants four-fifths and
that quadrants there nine-tenths is the same as
that spread or projective quadrants between these
two lines and our notation is that if there's not
enough room we can put the little line anywhere
between the two lines so between this line and
this line we could put it there or we could put
it there we could put it there or there that night
tense equals Latin nine-tenths but that 1/2 equals
I won't have that 4/5 equals at 4/5 so we're
connecting in the most direct possible fashion
our understanding of one-dimensional projective
geometry with the regular affine Euclidean
geometry of the plane and the intermediary is
our core circle that's sort of the link between
these two things okay so your exercise is to
prove the core circle quadrants theorem and
there's an easier way to do this and there is
a slightly more involved way doing this the easy
way is to take the corresponding result for the
unit circle and just see what happens when you
die late by half and translate by half the more
elaborate way is to go back to the fundamentals
and make a computation so either way prove the
core circle quadrants theorem all right so now I
want to turn to another important result that we
established in math foundations 129 for the unit
circle and I want to see what the analog is for
our core circle this was the unit circle signed
area theorem which told us what the signed area
is of a triangle formed by three points on the
unit circle so e1 e2 e3 are three points on the
unit circle with rational parameterizations in the
obvious ways then here was an expression for the
signed area of the oriented or sine triangle e1 e2
e3 now that might have looked rather complicated
back then but now you probably look at this in
a new light I hope and look at that and say wow
I kind of see some projective quadrants is there
didn't before but now I do in fact it looks like
there's almost three projective quadrants --is at
least there would be if we square this whole thing
well actually squaring things is what we want to
do anyway because the signed area depends on the
orientation of our triangle remember if we go this
way or if we go this way the sign area changes by
a factor of minus one if we want something that's
independent of orientation we want to square the
sign area and we've seen that for various reasons
if we square the signed area and multiply by 16
then we get their true quantity which is called
the quad riah all right so 16 times the square
of this is really the fundamental sort of area
kind of a measurement associated to a triangle
right so now to the core circle the core circle
Quadra theorem we have three points on the core
circle c1 c2 c3 given by parameterizations just as
before you on T 1 u 2 T 2 u 3 T 3 then the theorem
is that the quad riah of this triangle c1 c2 c3
which I remind you is 16 times the square of the
area is 4 times q1 times q2 times q3 where q1 is
the projective quadrants between this projective
1 point and this projective 1 point and q2 is
the corresponding one between these and q3 is
a protective quadrants between this one and this
one so your exercise use star to prove this we
know geometrically how to go from our unit circle
to our core circle you divide by two dilate by a
factor of half and then translate by a half those
are very simple operations we can figure out what
that does to signed areas so knowing this for the
unit circle we can establish this very pleasantly
and simply for the core circle let's have a look
at an example well that's our example will be
exactly the same triangle that we were looking
at before a1 a2 a3 with coordinates 1/5 2/5 9/10
3/10 and 1/2 minus 1/2 this triangle sitting
inside our corner circle what's its quadrille
well the quadri is 16 times the square of the
area so you could use a determinant to calculate
the area because we know the coordinates of the
points but we also know the triple quad formula
we know Archimedes formula for the quadrille
its Archimedes function applied to these three
quadrants it's 1/2 4/5 and 9 tenths so 4/5 plus
9 tenths plus 1/2 squared minus 2 times the sum
4/5 squared plus 9 10 squared plus 1/2 squared
basically our rational analog of Heron's formula
and then you compute this and you find out that
you get 36 over 25 so that's 16 times the square
of the area of that triangle of course you can
use that to calculate the area very quickly if
you want to but this same number also equals 4
times the product 4/5 time's 9/10 times 1/2 that
product also evaluates to 36 over 25 and that's
what the theorem asserted theorem asserted that
the quadrille of this triangle was four times the
product of these three projective quadrants 'iz
and i want to restate this in a way that's sort
of independent of spreads or projective quadrants
--is purely as a Euclidean theorem we'll call it
the core circle triangle quadrants theorem which
is that if q1 q2 and q3 are the quadrants --is of
a triangle in the core circle like this one then
Archimedes function applied to q1 q2 q3 equals
four times q1 q2 q3 exactly the situation that we
have here this is the quadri of the triangle this
is four times the product of the quadrants these
are going to be equal if our triangle is inscribed
in the core circle the actual points are lying on
the core circle now this is just basically
the projective triple quad formula this is
the projective triple quad formula we can rewrite
this by saying this is s of Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 equals 0
let me note very carefully that just because this
relation holes for the core circle does not mean
that it holds for a general circle if you expand
our circle by dilating it by a certain factor the
non-homogeneity of this thing will mean that
the relation will alter this is quadratic in
the Q's this is cubic in the Q's so a dilation
is not going to preserve this relation that is
also a statement that has a lot of consequences
as turns out so very rich situation in this core
circle and really does connect very strongly with
our one-dimensional projective geometry in fact
gives us a way of visualizing or interpreting
projective quadrants instead of asking well
what's the meaning of the projective quadrants
of 1/2 there we can say ah what it really means
is that the corresponding two points on our core
circle are separated by a regular Euclidean affine
quadrants of 1/2 it's another way of thinking
about what the spread or the projective quadrants
means in the next video following on from this
one we're going to see that there's in fact an
even more elementary connection between these
projective quadrants --es and this core circle
that was an observation made by paul miller and
so when having a look at his protractor and then
we're going to tie the whole story together by
noting that things generalize we can generalize
this to a relativistic setting and then we get
connections again with special relativity very
interesting stuff so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you